How does javascript actually work.
Imagine getting this question during an engine.
Or how about this.
Explain the difference between asynchronous and synchronous and JavaScript.
Or maybe they ask you to explain the statement.
Javascript does a single threaded language that can be non blocking oh boy in this video we're going
to help you answer those questions.
This is a video you may need to visit a few times as you progress to really get it so don't feel discouraged
if you don't feel 100 percent confident.
Just keep watching it and you'll get it.
Now we don't need to know how javascript works internally to write a program but it is important to
learn.
I see a lot of people who have been developers for years and not know this.
It's like being a pilot and not knowing how an airplane can fly.
OK that's a little bit dramatic there but you get my point.
So let's start first.
What is a program.
Well a program has to do some simple things.
It has to allocate memory otherwise we wouldn't be able to have variables or even have a file on our
computer.
It also has to pass and execute scripts which means read and run commands.
Now we also know that from our previous discussion there is the JavaScript engine that each browser
implements and chrome it's the V8 and the V8 engine reads the javascript that we write and changes into
machine executable instructions for the browser.
Now the engine consists of two parts a memory heap and a whole stack.
Now the memory heap.
This is where the memory allocation happens.
And don't worry we're gonna talk about this and then the call stack.
This is where your code is read and executed.
It tells you where you are in the program.
So let's simplify this and show you why.
I mean I have Sublime Text over here and for us to allocate memory and the memory heap.
Well it's as simple as doing const A equals to 1.
We've just allocate a memory.
Now when we assign this the JavaScript engine is going to remember that.
Oh yeah.
A has a value of 1.
We've just used up the memory heap and I can keep going on on and on like this right.
I can keep copying and pasting and changing these variables to B and C and I can change the values to
a hundred and maybe here will be 10 call.
Now what's an issue that we see with this.
This is something called a memory leak that you're going to hear as you become a developer.
And what we've done here is we've created all these variables these global variables that are in the
memory field but you see this box right.
And with all memory we have a limited amount that we can actually have.
So by increasing the number of variables that we have imagine if I had just this page full of variables
and instead of just numbers they're like very very big arrays.
Well memory leaks happen when you have unused memory such as let's say we're not using the variable
a but it's still there.
Well by having unused memory just laying around it fills up this memory heap and that's why you might
hear why global variables are bad.
Global variables are bad because if we don't forget to clean up after ourselves we fill up this memory
heap and eventually the browser will not be able to work.
All right so that's memory.
Let's talk about the cold stack.
What is that well again with a cold stack we can have something like this console log I'll go one console
log to now finally console log three if I wrong this code in my browser terminal.
Well I get one two three so the cold stack if you remember that's what reads and executes our scripts.
So what the call stack does.
It reads the first line console log it gets put in this call stack to the JavaScript engine says boot
console dialogue has been added Let's pop it onto this call stack and then it runs it and creates one
then it says OK I'm removing the first console law because I just finished running it I'm going to place
the second console log into my call stack as it on here and says Yep execute two and then it removes
that it pops it and then gets console locked three and logs console log three and then finally removes
it but let's have a bit more of a complex example here to demonstrate this point.
Imagine I have something like this
I have a function concept one
and inside this function we have another function calls to and for now it's not really going to do much
is going to console dot log form.
And then in here we'll just say we run the two function so if I copy and paste this and place it into
our console and I run one I get four and ignore this error here.
It just related to my app in the browser.
But you see that we get four.
So what happened here.
According to the call stack.
Well if we have the code stack here we first ran the one function.
So on top of the call stack the one function gets run and as we enter into this call stack we see that
we run another function too.
So two goes on top of the call stack.
And now we run the two function which is console dot log.
So we have console done log for that's run inside of the two function.
So now that we've read this the call stack is going to say OK.
There's nothing else inside of this I'm going to run console log for.
So it's going to print out number four here.
It's going to remove that from the call stack and then remove the two and then remove the one because
it's just been called
and the call stack is now empty.
All right.
Awesome.
Now let's revisit this statement from the beginning of the video.
JavaScript is a single threaded language that can be non blocking single threaded means that it has
only one call stack and one call stack only it can only do one thing at a time.
And as you saw call stack is first in last out.
So whatever is at the top the call stack gets run first then below that below that below that Dell the
call stack is empty now.
Other languages can have multiple call stacks and these are called multi threaded.
You can also see how that might be beneficial to have multiple call stack so that we don't keep waiting
around for stuff.
Why was javascript designed to be single threaded while running code on a single thread can be quite
easy since you don't have to deal with complicated scenarios that arise in multi threaded environment.
You just have one thing to worry about.
And when I say issues with multi threaded environment can have such thing as deadlocks now guess what.
You just learned what synchronous programming means synchronous programming simply means.
Line one gets executed then Line 2 gets executed and then line 3 gets executed.
The latter can start before the first finishes.
So this console log too doesn't start until console lock finishes in console lock 3 doesn't start until
these above to finish because well we've looked at the call stack because of the call stack.
Now you may have heard of the site stack overflow.
If you're a developer you use it on a daily and have you ever wondered what Stack Overflow means well
Stack Overflow.
Is this when a stack is overflowing.
Kind of like we talked about memory leaks and how the memory heap of a JavaScript engine can overflow
well with Stack Overflow.
This happens when the coal stacks just gets bigger and bigger and bigger until it just doesn't have
enough space anymore.
How can we do that.
Can we recreate a stack overflow.
Yeah I can show you quickly that to create a stack overflow.
All you have to do is function foo like we have in here.
And this function will just have food.
Hand we're just going to run our food function.
All right that looks confusing what is happening here.
This is something called recursion
and recursion means a function that calls itself.
So if you look at what this function does we run foo and food gets executed.
What food does is well we run food again so it just keeps looping over and over and over.
Having a recursion but there is no end in sight right.
We keep adding foo to the Col stack.
We keep adding it over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over and we have a
stack overflow.
So if you want to have fun go into your browser go into your console and run something like this and
see what happens.
You're gonna get a stack overflow All right.
So hopefully this now makes sense.
The JavaScript engine which is the V8 engine and Chrome has a memory heap and a call stack.
Now
javascript is single threaded only one statement is executed at a time.
But there is a problem now isn't it.
What if.
Line 2 was a big big task.
We needed to do maybe loop through an array that had millions of items what would happen there.
Well we would have this console log execute.
Then the second line is a massive massive job.
We'll just work there and console like 3.
We'll take a really long time to get lost and in our small example.
That doesn't mean much but if he had this on a Web site well the user wouldn't be able to do anything.
The Web site would pretty much freeze until that task is done and the user just waits there.
That's not very good is it.
Well with synchronous task if we have one function that takes up a lot of time it's going to hold up
the line.
Imagine a buffet restaurant right.
If all the people want to eat but Bobby says Hold on guys have to keep eating and putting bacon on my
plate.
Well everybody has to wait in line.
So sounds like we need something non blocking.
Remember our first statement that we made in this video JavaScript as a single threaded language that
can be non blocking.
Ideally we don't wait around for things that take time.
So how do we do this while asynchronous to the rescue.
Think of asynchronous like a behavior synchronous execution is great because is predictable.
We know what happens first then what happens next.
What happens.
Third but it can get slow.
So when we have to do things like image processing or making requests over the network like API calls.
And don't worry we're going to talk about this in future videos.
We need something more than just synchronous tasks.
All right.
So you're thinking to yourself Andre how do we do asynchronous programming.
Well let me remove some of this clutter.
We can do asynchronous programming by doing something like this.
Set time out which we're gonna talk about is a function that comes within our browsers and it allows
us to create a timeout and we can just give it the first parameter is the function that we want to run
and then the second parameter is how many seconds we want to wait.
So let's say I want to wait two seconds so two hundred two thousand milliseconds.
If I do this now let's run into the console and see what happens.
Well what just happened.
We have console log 1 then console log three and then console log to two seconds later.
It looks like we just skipped this whole step and then put this at the very end well you've just witness
asynchronous programming in order to understand this and what just happened.
I need to take you to the next part and that is in order for JavaScript as we know it to run for the
JavaScript engine with memory heap and call stack to run.
We need more than just the JavaScript engine.
We need what we call a javascript runtime environment and JavaScript runtime environment is again part
of the browser.
It's included in the browsers.
They have extra things on top of the engine.
They have something called a web API as callback Q and an event loop and as you can see here set timeout
is part of the web API.
It's not technically part of javascript is it.
It's what the browsers give us to use so we can do asynchronous programming.
OK so looking at this diagram let's see if we can figure out what our code was doing we can create here
our own call stack we'll have web API and then we'll have a callback Q And then finally just like we
have in our javascript runtime environment.
So what's happening here.
Well first we have console log that goes into the call stack and that gets run.
So we log console log to the browser.
We then get set timeout into our call stack because we finish this first task we're going to the second
one.
And what's set timeout.
What's gonna happen is well the call stack is gonna say Okay I have set timeout and because said timeout
is not part of javascript but part of the web API in has this special characteristic.
What's gonna happen is it triggers the web API and says Hey set timeout has just been called and because
we notified away bag guy we can pop it out of the call stack.
Now the web API starts a timer here a timer of two seconds but it's going to know that in two seconds
you have to do something and because the call stack is empty the JavaScript engine now goes to console
log 3 and executes this so that makes sense right.
Now we've done one and three but we still have said timeout two seconds in the web API.
Now after two seconds when our time limit is up the web API is going to say OK set time timeout should
be run let's see what's inside of it.
Well we have console locked too.
So what's going to happen is it's going to say hey said timeout is done.
We have a callback and this callback of said timeout we added to the callback queue saying that hey
we have to run something we're ready to run it.
Now the last part the event the event loop over here checks and says hey is the call stack empty.
And it keeps checking all the time if this stack is empty and if the call stack is empty and there's
nothing running right now in the javascript engine it's going to say hey do we have any callbacks.
It's going to check the callback queue and say is anything in there because the call stack is empty.
We can throw something in there and make it do some work in our case we say oh yeah I do.
Let me put this into the call stack.
So now we move the callback into the calls stack and then the callback we run it.
And by running and we see that we have console log too.
So it's going to say console log to it's going to run this function and once it's done it's going to
pop it out of the call stack.
And again we're done with the callback.
So we remove it and there you go.
We're done.
Everything is empty.
And we've just run this one three.
It's going to go through the entire web API callback queue event loop and then it's going to run console
log to crew.
That was a lot of information.
So you might need to watch that a few times but hopefully that makes sense to you of why we noticed
this behavior.
And I want to challenge your understanding here.
Knowing what you know and what I just tell you what happens if I changed this to zero that means zero
seconds I'm going to give you a second to think about what will happen.
And then we're going to try to set clear the console.
Copy and paste this and run it well one three and two did you guess right now think about why that happened
even though this is zero seconds it still went through the process it still got entered into the web
API eyes and then the callback queue and then they invented it.
And by the time that was happening the call stack had already moved on to the console lock three and
only after console log three was done in the call stack was empty.
The event loop said oh yeah we can call a console log to hopefully that makes sense for you.
And if you're able to understand that you'll actually have a lot of people that hire for JavaScript
roles ask questions like this on an interview and you have to explain why that is.
So I hope that made sense to you and you can use that to your advantage at the next interview.
So let's recap
if you wanted to load your latest tweet onto a Web page and you do this synchronicity then visitors
to your site won't be able to do anything until those tweets are loaded.
This could cause a long delay before they even get to see the content of your site.
They may not be able to click anywhere and the page will feel like it's frozen.
Not a very good user experiences.
Another way to think about this is calling your teacher with a question synchronous way is you.
Call the teacher you wait on the phone until the teacher answers the phone and ask him the question
and hopefully get an answer so you let the phone ring until he picks up but you're not doing anything
else in the meantime asynchronous means that you send a text to a teacher with a question and then when
the teacher he or she has the time will respond to you and call you with the answer.
So you can do other stuff in between javascript is asynchronous when you can leave it a message and
a callback tells you Hey Mr. Teacher has a message for you when you're not too busy and that's why we
call it a callback function and a callback.
We're calling back to let them know that hey there's some stuff waiting for you.
Now we see over here that we have Dom Ajax in timeout and there's a few other things but you also see
in the callback queue that we have on click on mode on done.
Do you remember the event listeners.
Well with an event listener we had something like an element and we added event listener and in this
then listener could say listen for a click and it will have a function that perhaps just console dog
log click well similar to an asynchronous way of programming we've created this click function.
And now we're just listening to it and every time a click happens on the web page.
So on the dom.
Well we run the callback function which console logs click.
Right.
So to finish things up when is asynchronous happening.
It happens a lot when you try and talk between machines like speaking to a database make network requests
image processing reading files and don't worry we'll go through this in future videos.
But to recap what we just learned javascript is a single threaded language that can be non blocking.
It has one call stack and it does one thing at a time.
In order to not block the single thread it can be asynchronous with callback functions and these code
malfunctions gets run in the background through the callback queue and then the amended to bring it
back into the call stack so next time you get asked What is the difference between a synchronous or
a synchronous program or how does javascript work.
You should have a little bit more confidence to answer that question and I hope that this was helpful.
I'll see in the next video by.